Billion-scale vector search with Vespa - part two (#153)
vespa-engine/blog: _posts/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two.md

---
layout: post
title: "Billion-scale vector search with Vespa - part two"
date: '2022-01-26'
tags: []
author: jobergum 
image: assets/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two/vincentiu-solomon-ln5drpv_ImI-unsplash.jpg
skipimage: true

excerpt: "Part two in a blog post series on billion-scale vector search with Vespa. 
This post explores the many trade-offs related to nearest neighbor search."
---

<img src="/assets/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two/vincentiu-solomon-ln5drpv_ImI-unsplash.jpg"/>
<p class="image-credit">
Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@vincentiu?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">
Vincentiu Solomon</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/s/photos/stars?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Unsplash</a>
</p>

In the [first post](../billion-scale-knn) in this series, we introduced compact binary-coded vector representations that can
reduce the storage and computational complexity of both exact and approximate nearest neighbor search. 
This second post covers an experiment using a 1-billion binary-coded representation derived from a

> vector dataset used in the [big-ann-benchmark](http://big-ann-benchmarks.com/) challenge. The primary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vector dataset used in the [big-ann-benchmark](http://big-ann-benchmarks.com/) challenge. The 
```

Author: Thanks, remove fluff

> purpose of this post in the series is to highlight some of the trade-offs related to approximate nearest neighbor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
purpose of this post is to highlight some of the trade-offs related to approximate nearest neighbor
```

search and especially we focus on serving performance versus accuracy. 

Vespa implements a version of the *HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small Word)*
[algorithm](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320) for approximate
vector search. Before diving into this post, we recommend reading the [HNSW in Vespa](../approximate-nearest-neighbor-search-in-vespa-part-1/)

> blog post for why we choose the *HNSW* algorithm.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog post explaining why we chose the *HNSW* algorithm.   
```

# Choosing a Vector Dataset

> When working with vector datasets and nearest neighbor search algorithms, using vectors from an

Reviewer: I suggest replacing this whole paragraph by something like "When evaluating approximate nearest neighbor search algorithms it is important to use realistic vector data. If you don't have the vectors for your problem at hand, use a publicly available dataset."

actual data distribution is essential. Randomly generated vector data could play a role when
exploring brute force algorithms for [nearest neighbor search (NNS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nearest_neighbor_search)
but prefer vector data from an actual distribution when evaluating approximate NNS algorithms. 

For our experiments, we chose the [Microsoft SPACEV-1B](https://github.com/microsoft/SPTAG/tree/main/datasets/SPACEV1B)
from Bing as our base vector dataset. 
 >This is a dataset released by Microsoft from SpaceV, Bing web vector search scenario, for large
scale vector search-related research usage. It consists of more than one billion document vectors
and 29K+ query vectors encoded by the Microsoft SpaceV Superior model. 

The vector dataset was published last year as part of the 
[big-ann-benchmarks](http://big-ann-benchmarks.com/) challenge. 

> The vector dataset consists of one billion 100-dimensional vectors using `int8` precision. In other words,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It consists of one billion 100-dimensional vectors using `int8` precision. In other words,
```

each of the hundred vector dimensions is a number in the [-128,127] range. 
The dataset has 29,3K queries with pre-computed ground truth nearest neighbors using the euclidean distance for each query
vector. Vespa supports four different [tensor vector precision types](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/tensor-user-guide.html#cell-value-types), 
in order of increasing precision:

* `int8` (8 bits, 1 byte) per dimension
* `bfloat16` (16 bits, 2 bytes) per dimension
* `float` (32 bits, 4 bytes) per dimension
* `double` (64 bits, 8 bytes) per dimension

Quantization and dimension reduction as part of the representation learning could save both
memory and CPU cycles in the serving phase, and Microsoft researchers have undoublty had this in mind
when using 100 dimensions with `int8` precision for the embedding. 

> Using the threshold function, we convert the mentioned *SPACEV-1B* vector dataset to a new and binarized

Reviewer: Should you say something about why we do this?

Author: Done, point to first blog post.

node resources for the core Vespa service types, see [services.xml](https://cloud.vespa.ai/en/reference/services)
reference guide for details:

2x Stateless container with search API (&lt;search&gt;)
<pre>
&lt;nodes count=&quot;2&quot;&gt;
  &lt;resources memory=&quot;12Gb&quot; vcpu=&quot;16&quot; disk=&quot;100Gb&quot;/&gt;
&lt;/nodes&gt
</pre>

2x Stateless container with feed API (&lt;document-api&gt;)
<pre>
&lt;nodes count=&quot;2&quot;&gt;
  &lt;resources memory=&quot;12Gb&quot; vcpu=&quot;16&quot; disk=&quot;100Gb&quot;/&gt;
&lt;/nodes&gt
</pre>
1x Stateful content cluster for storing and indexing the vector dataset
<pre>
&lt;nodes count=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
  &lt;resources memory=&quot;256Gb&quot; vcpu=&quot;72&quot; disk=&quot;1000Gb&quot; disk-speed=&quot;fast&quot;/&gt;
&lt;/nodes&gt;
</pre>

This deployment specification isolates resources used for feed and search, except for search and indexing related 
resource usage on the content node. Isolating feed and search allows for easier on-demand resource scaling as the 
stateless containers can be [auto-scaled](https://cloud.vespa.ai/en/autoscaling) faster with read and write

> volume than stateful content resources. However, for self-hosted deployments of Vespa, there is no node resource support or auto-scaling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
volume than stateful content resources. For self-hosted deployments of Vespa, you need to list the nodes you are using, and there is no auto-scaling.
```

The following is the base [Vespa document schema](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/schema-reference.html) we use throughout our experiments:

<pre>
schema code {
  document code {
    field id type int {
      indexing: summary|attribute
    }
    field binary_code type tensor&lt;int8&gt;(b[13]) {
      indexing: attribute
      attribute {
        distance-metric:hamming
      }
    }
  }
}
</pre>
<sub>*Vespa document schema without HNSW indexing enabled*</sub>

> # Evaluation Metrics 

Reviewer: This is a very good section!

Author: Thanks!

vector search does not necessarily severely impact the end-to-end recall metric. 

Similarly, when using ANNS for image search at a web scale, there might be many equally relevant
images for almost any query. Therefore, losing relevant "redundant" pictures due to nearest neighbor
search accuracy degradation might not impact end-to-end metrics like revenue and user satisifaction severely.  

However, reducing vector recall quality will impact other applications using nearest
neighbor search algorithms. Consider, for example, a biometric fingerprint recognition application
that uses nearest neighbor search to find the *closest* neighbor for a given query fingerprint in
a database of many fingerprints. Accepting any accuracy loss as measured by
Recall@1 (*the* true closest neighbor) will have severe consequences for the overall usefulness of the
application.  

# Vector Indexing performance
We want to quantify the impact of adding data structures for faster and approximate vector search on
vector indexing throughput. We use the [Vespa HTTP feeding client](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/vespa-http-client.html) 
to feed vector data to the Vespa instance. 

> It is expected that indexing performance is degraded when enabling *HNSW* indexing for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing becomes more expensive when enabling *HNSW* indexing for
```

approximate vector search. This is because insertion into the *HNSW* graph requires distance calculations and graph
modifications which reduces overall throughput. Vespa's *HNSW* implementation uses multiple threads for
distance calculations during indexing, but only a single writer thread can mutate the *HNSW* graph. 

> The single writer thread limits concurrency and resource utilization. Generally, Vespa balances CPU resources used for indexing versus searching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The single writer thread limits concurrency and resource consumption. Generally, Vespa balances CPU resources used for indexing versus searching
```

last listed parameter combination:

<pre>
schema code {
  document code {
    field id type int {
      indexing: summary|attribute
    }
    field binary_code type tensor&lt;int8&gt;(b[13]) {
      indexing: attribute|index
      attribute {
        distance-metric:hamming
      }
      index {
        hnsw {
          max-links-per-node: 16
          neighbors-to-explore-at-insert: 96
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
</pre>
<sub>*Vespa document schema with HNSW enabled*</sub>

The real-time indexing throughput results are summarized in the following chart:
<figure>
    <img src="/assets/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two/throughput.png" alt="Indexing performance"/>
</figure>
<sub>*Real-time indexing performance without HNSW indexing and with two HNSW parameter combinations.*</sub>

Without *HNSW* enabled, Vespa is able to sustain 80 000 vector puts/s. By increasing the number of nodes in the 
Vespa content cluster using Vespa's [content distribution](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/elastic-vespa.html), 
it is possible to increase throughput horizontally. For example, using four nodes instead of one, would support 4x80 000 = 320 000 puts/.

> As we can see from the chart,  when we introduce *HNSW* indexing, the obtained real-time throughput drops significantly as it involves mutations of the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see from the chart,  when we introduce *HNSW* indexing, the write throughput drops significantly as it involves mutations of the 
```

> *HNSW* graph and distance calculations.  In addition to indexing throughput, we also measure peak memory usage for the content node which is provided in the chart below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*HNSW* graph and distance calculations.  In addition to indexing throughput, we also measure peak memory usage for the content node:
```

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two/memory.png" alt="Memory Usage(GB)"/>
</figure>
<sub>*Peak Memory Usage without HNSW indexing and with two HNSW parameter combinations.*</sub>

Now, you might ask, why are Vespa using 64G of memory for this dataset in the baseline case without *HNSW*?  

> The reason is that Vespa stores the global documentid in memory, and the documentid consumes more memory than the vector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason is that Vespa stores the _global document id_ (a 96-bit hash of the document id string) in memory, and the document id consumes more memory than the vector
```

data alone. 1B global document identifiers is about 33GB worth of memory usage. Finally, there is also 4GB of data for the integer id attribute. 
This additional memory used for the in-memory global document id (gid), is used to support [elastic content distribution](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/elastic-vespa.html), 
[fast partial updates](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/partial-updates.html) and more. 

As we introduce *HNSW* indexing, the memory usage increases significantly due to the additional *HNSW* graph data structure which is also 
in memory for fast access during searches and insertions. 

# Brute-force exact nearest neighbor search performance 
As we have seen in the indexing performance and memory utilization experiments, not using *HNSW* uses
considerably less memory, and is the clear indexing throughput winner - but what about the search
performance of brute force search? Without *HNSW* graph indexing, the complexity of the search for neighbors is linear with
the total document volume, so that is surely slow for 1B documents?

> To overcome the latency issue, We can use one of the essential Vespa features: Executing a query using multiple

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To overcome the latency issue, we can use one of the essential Vespa features: Executing a query using multiple
```

> To overcome the latency issue, We can use one of the essential Vespa features: executing a query using multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To overcome the latency issue, We can use one of the essential Vespa features: Executing a query using multiple
```

[search threads](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/performance/sizing-search.html#num-threads-per-search). 

> By using more threads per query, Vespa can better use multi-CPU core architecture and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using more threads per query, Vespa can make better use of multi-CPU core architectures and
```

> reduce query latency at the cost of increased CPU resource usage per query. Most search libraries or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reduce query latency at the cost of increased CPU usage per query. Most search libraries or
```

engines require high concurrent query throughput to drive CPU utilization. 
On the other hand, Vespa allows micro-slicing of the intra-node document volume so that multiple threads can execute the same
query in parallel, each search thread working on a [partition](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/schema-reference.html#num-search-partitions) 

> of the node's document volume. More threads per search lowers search latency, especially at the tail, at the cost of increased resource usage per query.

Reviewer: A bit much repetition of the same point in this paragraph.

Author: Thanks, I've compressed it.

See more on using threads per search in the [Sizing and performance guide](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/performance/sizing-search.html#reduce-latency-with-multi-threaded-per-search-execution). 

To easily test multiple threading configurations, we deploy multiple 

> Vespa [ranking profiles](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/ranking.html), chosing ranking profile is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vespa [rank profiles](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/ranking.html). Choosing ranking profile is 
```

> a query time setting so it's easy to run experiments without having to re-deploy the application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
done in the query so it's easy to run experiments without having to re-deploy the application. 
```

where CPU utilization is low (over-provisioned resources). In our case, 
using all available CPU cores for our exact ground truth calculations reduced the overall time duration significantly. 

# Approximate nearest neighbor search performance 
Moving from exact to approximate nearest neighbor search, we evaluate the search performance
versus accuracy using the recall@10 metric for the same *HNSW* combinations we used
to evaluate indexing performance:

* max-links-per-node = 8, neighbors-to-explore-at-insert 48 
* max-links-per-node = 16, neighbors-to-explore-at-insert 96 

We use the exact search to obtain the 100 ground truth exact nearest neighbors for all the queries in the dataset, and use those for the 
approximate nearest neighbor search *recall@10* evaluation. We use 100 in the ground truth set to be able to take into account *distance ties*.

With approximate nearest neighbor search in Vespa, the traversal of the HNSW graph uses one thread per
search irrespective of the number of configured rank profile search threads; the threads are put to
use if the ranking profile uses higher-level subsequent [ranking phases](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/phased-ranking.html).

> For use cases and ranking profiles without higher level ranking phases, it's recommended to explicit configure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For use cases and ranking profiles without higher level ranking phases, we recommend explicitly configuring
```

in the figure below: 

<figure>
<img src="/assets/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two/ann.png"/>
</figure>
<sub>*Approximate nearest neighbor search performance versus recall@10.*</sub>

We produce the graph by running all 29,3K queries in the binarized dataset and computing
the *recall@10* and measure the latency for different run time values of 
[hnsw.exploreAdditionalHits](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/query-language-reference.html#nearestneighbor).
The *hnsw.exploreAdditionalHits* run-time parameter allows us to tune quality versus cost without re-building the *HNSW graph*.

As we can see from the above graph, using more indexing resources with more links and more distance
calculations during graph insertion improves the search quality at the same cost/latency. 
As a result, we reach 90% recall@10 instead of 64% recall@10 at the exact cost of 4 ms search time. 
Of course, the level of acceptable *recall@10* will be use case dependent, but the above figure illustrates the impact on search
quality when using different construction HNSW parameters.

Furthermore, comparing the 4ms at 90% recall@10 with the exact nearest neighbor search performance

> of 15000 ms, we achieve a speedup of 3,750x. Note that these are latency numbers for single-threaded searches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of 15000 ms, we see that we achieve a speedup of 3,750x. Note that these are latency numbers for single-threaded searches.
```

For example, with 4 ms average latency per search using one thread, a node with one CPU core will be able to evaluate up to about 250
queries per second. 72 CPU cores would be 72x that, reaching 18,000 queries per second at 100% CPU
utilization. Scaling further for increased query throughput is achieved using multiple replicas using grouped content
distribution (Or more CPU cores per node). See more on how to size Vespa search deployments in the 
[Vespa sizing guide](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/performance/sizing-search.html). 

# Summary 
In this blog post, we explored several trade-offs related to vector search.  
We concluded that the quality, as measured by recall@k, must be weighed against the use case metrics 

> and the deployment cost.Furthermore, we demonstrated how multi-threaded search could reduce the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the deployment cost. Furthermore, we demonstrated how multi-threaded search could reduce the 
```

vector. Vespa supports four different [tensor vector precision types](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/tensor-user-guide.html#cell-value-types), 
in order of increasing precision:

* `int8` (8 bits, 1 byte) per dimension
* `bfloat16` (16 bits, 2 bytes) per dimension
* `float` (32 bits, 4 bytes) per dimension
* `double` (64 bits, 8 bytes) per dimension

Quantization and dimension reduction as part of the representation learning could save both
memory and CPU cycles in the serving phase, and Microsoft researchers have undoubtedly had this in mind
when using 100 dimensions with `int8` precision for the embedding. 

In the [first post](../billion-scale-knn)in this series we discussed some of the benefits of working with binarized vector datasets
where the original vector representation (e.g, `int8`) is transformed to binary. 
We don't train a binary representation model, but instead use the unsupervised *sign* threshold function. 
Using the threshold function, we convert the mentioned *SPACEV-1B* vector dataset to a new and binarized
dataset. Both queries and document vectors are binarized, and we use the [hamming distance

> metric](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/schema-reference.html#distance-metric) for the NNS 

Author: Thanks!

with our new dataset. 

```
import numpy as np
import binascii
#vector is np.array([-12,3,4....100],dtype=np.int8)
binary_code = np.packbits(np.where(vector > 0, 1,0)).astype(np.int8)
```
<sub>*Binarization using [NumPy](https://numpy.org/)*</sub>

The binarization step packs the original vector into 104 bits, which is represented using a 
13 dimensional dense single-order `int8` tensor in Vespa. 

However, this transformation from *euclidean* to *hamming* does not preserve the
original euclidean distance ordering, so we calculate a new set of ground truth nearest neighbors
for the query dataset using *hamming* distance. Effectively, we create a new binarized vector dataset
which we can use to experiment and demonstrate some trade-offs related to vector search:

* Brute force nearest neighbor search using multiple search threads to parallelize the search for
exact nearest neighbors 

> * Approximate nearest neighbor search using where we accept an accuracy loss compared

Author: Fixed

Vespa exposes two core [HNSW construction parameters](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/schema-reference.html#index-hnsw)
that impacts feeding performance (and quality as we will see in subsequent sections):

* **max-links-per-node** Specifies how many links are created per vector inserted into the graph. The
default value in Vespa is 16. The [HNSW paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320) calls this parameter **M**.  
A higher value of *max-links-per node* increases memory usage and reduces indexing throughput, but also improves the quality of the graph. 
Note that the parameter also defines the memory consumption of the algorithm (which is proportional to *max-links-per-node*). 

* **neighbors-to-explore-at-insert**  Specifies how many neighbors to explore when inserting a vector in
the HNSW graph. The default value in Vespa is 200. This parameter is called **efConstruction** in the HNSW paper. 
A higher value generally improves the quality but lowers indexing throughput as each insertion requires more
distance computations. This parameter does not impact memory footprint. 

> We experiment with the following *HNSW* parameters combinations for evaluating feed indexing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We experiment with the following *HNSW* parameter combinations for evaluating feed indexing
```

Without *HNSW* enabled, Vespa is able to sustain 80 000 vector puts/s. By increasing the number of nodes in the 
Vespa content cluster using Vespa's [content distribution](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/elastic-vespa.html), 
it is possible to increase throughput horizontally. For example, using four nodes instead of one, would support 4x80 000 = 320 000 puts/.

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two/throughput_graph.png" alt="Indexing performance"/>
</figure>
<sub>*Sustained real-time indexing without HNSW, screenshot from Vespa Cloud Metrics*</sub>

 When we introduce *HNSW* indexing, the write-throughput drops significantly as it involves mutations of the
*HNSW* graph and distance calculations.  In addition to indexing throughput, we also measure peak memory usage for the content node:

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two/memory.png" alt="Memory Usage(GB)"/>
</figure>
<sub>*Peak Memory Usage without HNSW indexing and with two HNSW parameter combinations.*</sub>

Now, you might ask, why are Vespa using 64G of memory for this dataset in the baseline case without *HNSW*?  

> The reason is that Vespa stores the _global document id_ (a 96-bit hash of the document id string) in memory, and the document id consumes more memory than the vector

Reviewer 3: Consider adding a link to https://docs.vespa.ai/en/attributes.html#document-meta-store.

Author: Done

  }
}

rank-profile hamming-t2 inherits hamming {
  num-threads-per-search:2
}
..
</pre>
<sub>*Ranking profiles defined in the document schema.*</sub>

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/2022-01-27-billion-scale-knn-part-two/exact-search.png" alt="Exact NNS versus threads"/>
</figure>
<sub>*Exact nearest neighbor search performance versus threads used per query.*</sub>

As we can see from the figure above, one search thread uses on average 15 seconds to compute the exact nearest neighbors. 
By increasing the number of search threads per query to 32, we can reach sub-second search latency. 
The catch is that at as low as one query per second (QPS), the node would be running at close to 100% CPU utilization. 
Still, trading latency over throughput might be a good decision for some use cases that do not require high query throughput or 
where CPU utilization is low (over-provisioned resources). In our case, 
using all available CPU cores for our exact ground truth calculations reduced the overall time duration significantly. 

# Approximate nearest neighbor search performance 
Moving from exact to approximate nearest neighbor search, we evaluate the search performance

> versus accuracy using the recall@10 metric for the same *HNSW* combinations we used

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
versus accuracy using the recall@10 metric for the same *HNSW* parameter combinations we used
```

The *hnsw.exploreAdditionalHits* run-time parameter allows us to tune quality versus cost without re-building the *HNSW graph*.

As we can see from the above graph, using more indexing resources with more links and more distance
calculations during graph insertion improves the search quality at the same cost/latency. 
As a result, we reach 90% recall@10 instead of 64% recall@10 at the exact cost of 4 ms search time. 
Of course, the level of acceptable *recall@10* will be use case dependent, but the above figure illustrates the impact on search
quality when using different construction HNSW parameters.

Furthermore, comparing the 4ms at 90% recall@10 with the exact nearest neighbor search performance
of 15000 ms, we see that we achieve a speedup of 3,750x. Note that these are latency numbers for single-threaded searches.
For example, with 4 ms average latency per search using one thread, a node with one CPU core will be able to evaluate up to about 250
queries per second. 72 CPU cores would be 72x that, reaching 18,000 queries per second at 100% CPU
utilization. Scaling further for increased query throughput is achieved using multiple replicas using grouped content

> distribution (Or more CPU cores per node). See more on how to size Vespa search deployments in the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
distribution (or more CPU cores per node). See more on how to size Vespa search deployments in the 
```
